医学图像数据的采集和标注一直是许多数据驱动医学图像处理任务中面临的挑战，尤其是注册的多模态医学图像数据。利用图像合成技术可以缓解这一问题。但医学影像包含复杂的生理结构信息，现有方法直接合成医学图像会生成不合理的结构、轮廓和不可控的病灶。其次，合成多种模态的医学影像时如何确保模态之间的配准是另一个挑战。此外，如何控制医学影像中最关键的病灶信息的合成也是一个挑战。最后合成影像和合成病灶需要一种客观的方式来验证和评估其性能。
The collection and annotation of medical image data have always been a challenge in many data-driven medical image processing tasks, especially for registered multimodal medical image data. This can be alleviated by utilizing the image synthesis technology. 
However, medical images contain complex physiological structure information, and the existing methods to directly synthesize medical images will generate unreasonable structure, contour and uncontrollable lesions. Secondly, how to ensure the registration between the modalities when synthesizing multimodal  medical images is an another challenge. In addition, how to control the synthesis of the most critical lesion information in medical images is also a challenge. Finally, an objective way is needed to verify and evaluate the performance of synthetic images and lesions.

针对这些问题，本研究提出了一种基于生成对抗网络的多模态医学影像合成方案，无需配准训练数据即可从随机矩阵合成具有指定病灶的配准多模态医学影像，并在多个数据集上充分验证了合成病灶的有效性和合成影像的可用性。主要工作如下：
To solve these problems, this study proposed a multimodal medical image synthesis method based on Generative Adversarial Networks , which can synthesize registration multimodal medical images with specified lesions and without using registration training data. Experiments on multiple datasets have comprehensively verified the effectiveness of synthetic lesions and the availability of synthetic images. The main work is as follows:

1.本研究提出了一种基于Sobel算子的结构特征图提取和生成方法，无需额外的结构信息标签和标签提取训练，可直接从真实影像提取出结构特征图并用于变分自动编码器的训练，最后得到的模型实现了从正态分布合成任意数量的结构特征图。
This study proposed a structural map extraction and synthesis method based on Sobel operator, no additional structural information labels and the labels extraction training, can be used to extract structural map directly from the real images, then feed the structural map extracted to Variational Auto-Encoder training. The model trained can implement the synthesis of any number of structural maps from the normal distribution.

2.本研究提出了一种可控制病灶合成的多模态配准影像合成方案，将随机生成的结构特征图选取的病灶标签融合后再合成多模态医学影像，通过模态转换器实现合成的多模态之间的转换一致性约束确保合成的多模态之间的配准，通过病灶处理器实现对合成影像的病灶标签还原约束确保合成影像根据输入的标签生成对应的病灶。
This study proposes a multimodal registration medical images synthesis scheme that can control lesion synthesis. The structural maps generated randomly are used to fuse the selected lesion labels to synthesize multimodal medical images. Consistency constraints between the synthesized modalities are achieved through modal translation to ensure registration between the synthesized modalities. The lesion label reconstruction constraint on the synthetic image is implemented by the lesion processor to ensure that the synthetic image generates a corresponding lesion according to the input label.

3. 本研究使用两项指标对合成影像的质量进行直接评估，同时通过将合成影像用于智能医学影像处理任务的训练，再评估训练出的模型，间接地评估了合成影像的性能。结果表明合成影像可用于预训练和数据增强并能显著提升模型的泛化能力。
In this study, two indicators were used to directly evaluate the quality of the synthesized images. Meanwhile, the performance of the synthesized images was indirectly evaluated by applying the synthesized images to the training of intelligent medical image processing tasks and evaluating the trained models. The results show that the synthesized image can be used for pretraining and data enhancement and can significantly improve the generalization ability of the model.

关键词：医学影像、图像合成、多模态配准、病灶、生成对抗网络
Medical Images, Image Synthesis, Multimodal Registration, Lesions, Generative Adversarial Networks